Aethina tumida Lifecycle and Biology
Adult

Aethina tumida adults are 5–7 mm long and 3–4.5 mm wide, are reddish brown or black in color, and have short, strong elytra (Neumann et al. 2013). The sex of A. tumida adults can easily be determined by gently squeezing their abdomens, which causes the ovipositor to protrude in females and the eight tergite to extend in males (Neumann et al. 2013). The adult A. tumida life span is variable and is dependent on environmental conditions and sex of the beetle, with the female-biased sex ratio suggesting shorter female A. tumida life spans, as the female beetles would need to repopulate at a faster rate (Papach et al. 2019). Adult beetles in the wild are thought to live up to six months (Pettis and Shimanuki 2000). However, it has been estimated that A. tumida adults in the laboratory could live up to 16 months, with female life-span dependent on egg laying frequency (Somerville 2003, Neumann et al. 2016). It is well known that arthropods can exchange fitness factors such as longevity for increased reproductive output, so it is likely that higher egg numbers can result in shorter A. tumida female life spans (Jervis et al. 2007). Aethina tumida adults are also capable of surviving and reproducing on various decaying fruit species; however, pupation success is significantly greater when larvae feed on hive products (Ellis et al. 2002). Unfortunately, bumblebee (Bombus impatiens Cresson) colonies can also be alternate hosts for A. tumida, with one study revealing that A. tumida adults did not display preference between A. mellifera and B. impatiens colonies and that A. tumida females will oviposit in B. impatiens colonies (Hoffmann et al. 2008). Infestations of B. impatiens colonies, along with other potential A. tumida infestations of native pollinators and wild A. mellifera colonies, pose a risk to managed colonies, since infestation levels in the environments surrounding apiaries could become high without any intervention by apiarists until A. tumida is well established in that geographic range.

Egg

Once A. tumida mating occurs, females preferentially oviposit in cracks and crevices of the hive (Neumann and Härtel 2004) in clusters of 10–30 eggs (Stedman 2006; Fig. 2). Female beetles can also oviposit their eggs on pollen and brood comb (Cuthbertson et al. 2013), sometimes even chewing holes in capped brood for oviposition (Ellis et al. 2004). Aethina tumida sex ratios are significantly female-biased, with 1.58 females for each male (Papach et al. 2019), and females can lay 1,000–2,000 eggs throughout their lifetimes (Somerville 2003). Consequently, several adult beetles can lead to large larval populations (Somerville 2003). Aethina tumida eggs are a translucent white color, cylindrically shaped, and measure approximately 1.4 mm in length, and 0.26 mm in width (Stedman 2006). Egg hatching time is dependent on temperature and humidity, with hatching generally thought to take place after 3 d in the hive environment (Somerville 2003). In one study, eggs were observed to hatch after 2 d at temperatures of 34°C, while a 3-d egg incubation period was noted at temperatures ranging from 24 to 28°C (Guzman and Frake 2007).

Larva

Upon their emergence, A. tumida larvae (Fig. 3) are approximately 1.3 mm in length, growing swiftly throughout their development to reach approximately 1 cm in length in their last instar (Neumann et al. 2013). Aethina tumida larvae are light-yellow in color with two rows of short dorsal spines which run along the length of the larval body, ending in two larger spines on the final dorsal segment (Neumann et al. 2013). Aethina tumida larvae can be easily distinguished from other larvae that may be present in the hive, as A. mellifera larvae are immobile and stay in the comb cells until capping, while greater wax moth (Galleria mellonella, Fabricius) larvae are much larger than A. tumida larvae and lesser wax moth (Achroia grisella, Fabricius) larvae lack the distinctive dorsal spines of A. tumida larvae. As larvae produce waste, this leads to increased growth of the A. tumida yeast symbiont Kodamaea ohmeri within the hive, causing fermentation of honeycomb, pollen, and beetle waste, which is sometimes referred to as ‘slime’ (Benda et al. 2008, Hayes et al. 2015). In addition to feeding upon hive products, A. tumida larvae will also eat A. mellifera eggs (Elzen et al. 1999) and brood (Neumann et al. 2001). Aethina tumida larval development is heavily dependent on temperature, with one study finding that larvae could reach their peak weight in less than 8 d when maintained at 35°C, while this same process of development took 17 d when the temperature was 21°C (Meikle and Patt 2011). Thus, warm weather and cycles of population increase and foraging in colonies best facilitate A. tumida development. Once A. tumida larvae reach their third and final instars, which usually takes 10–14 d, A. tumida larvae exit the hive and migrate to the surrounding soil to begin pupation, sometimes crawling distances of over 200 m (Stedman 2006).